[Music]
hello and welcome to unstress where we
try to get a grip on some of the things
that stresses and hopefully what to do
about it I'm dr. Ron early cancer now
one in two men one in three women will
contract cancer by the age of 60 or
maybe 65 before we put that all down to
getting older since 1971 when President
Nixon declared a war on cancer
the incidence has gone up 25 to 30
percent and that is allowing for the
Aged lifespan increase childhood cancers
are also on the rise and I doubt if
there is a single person listening to
this that doesn't know someone within
their immediate family or friends or
maybe even themselves who hasn't had
cancer I'm putting my hand up here and I
certainly name quite a few of our
members of my family and friends now in
order to solve a problem this may sound
obvious but in order to solve a problem
it really helps if you know what causes
the problem particularly if you want to
target your treatment to that problem so
what causes cancer now everyone will
have their own list of triggers nicotine
environmental chemicals and toxins
radiation infection or a family genetic
history the accepted theory for the last
40 or 50 years at least is that it's a
genetic issue with those triggers
causing genes to mutate and then go out
of control it's actually referred to as
the somatic mutation theory somatic
referring to the cells of the body the
answer to that problem then would be to
target the genes of the cancer cells but
there are quite a few problems with that
approach one cancer cells don't have the
same genes from one person to another so
my prostate cancer cell genes will be
very different from someone else's
cancer
prostate cancer genes so that's number
one number two even within my own body
unlike all normal cells which share the
same genetic makeup the cancer cells in
one person are all quite different they
are random and they have chaotic
mutations three in order to target those
chaotic random genes in cancer cells you
can't really be very targeted you need
to go through in a sort of a
hand-grenade or use an automatic machine
gun and kill lots of cells and it's why
chemotherapy has so many terrible side
effects because healthy cells are
affected as well as cancer cells what if
there was something else going on what
if there was an important step in
between the triggers of nicotine and
environmental toxins stress etc and the
genetic mutation what if there was a
step in between those two what if we
understood that step and and targeted
that which in turn killed only cancer
cells and came with no or minimal side
effects my guest today is Professor
Thomas Savery he received his PhD in
genetics and biochemistry in 1976 so he
was certainly not shying away from a
genetic basis to this and other
conditions about 18 years ago he became
interested in the idea that mechanisms
of metabolism specifically how we get
our energy might be significant that is
how normal cells normal human cells
throughout the body get their energy and
concluded that this knowledge could be
useful in managing many chronic diseases
including challenging neurological ones
like epilepsy and perhaps the most
challenging one of all cancer that is
getting down to the biochemistry looking
at how cells produce energy cells need
energy to survive thrive and multiply so
how they produce it as you will hear is
very important
and equally important is how and to know
how cancer cells produce their energy
and if there was a difference between
cancer cells and human cells after
extensive research exploring and
expanding on work done by a Nobel Prize
winner Otto Warburg in Ottawa Berg in in
the about this was about 80 years ago
the challenges that very concept he
wrote a groundbreaking book cancer as a
metabolic disease and the can't the
metabolic therapies that he refers to
include caloric restrictions fasting
clearer genic diets and hyperbaric
therapy now Tomas mentions hyperbaric
therapy so just to briefly put you in
the picture that involves breathing pure
oxygen in a pressurized room or tube you
may have heard of it in relation to
scuba diving and it's very well
established treatment for decompression
sickness other conditions treated with
hyperbaric oxygen therapy include
serious infections and wounds that won't
heal as real as a result of diabetes or
radiation therapy in a hyperbaric
chamber the air pressures increase to
three times higher than normal air
pressure under those conditions your
lungs gather more oxygen that would be
possible breathing pure oxygen at normal
air pressure and your blood carries that
extra oxygen throughout your body and it
helps fight infections and stimulates
the release of substances like growth
hormones and stem cells which promote
healing don't want to focus too much on
it other than to explain it a bit here
he touches on it and you may not know
what he's actually talking about there
are some really important concepts we
discuss here this is relevant to every
single one of us I hope you enjoy this
conversation I had with Professor Thomas
Seyfried welcome to the show Thomas
thank you right it's a pleasure to be
here Thomas we're talking about cancer
today and some really really fundamental
issues about it I wonder if we could
just start from a very basic question
because we hear it so often the word
cancer what is actually cancer what's
going on cancer is a very simplistic
definite
it's just cells that are no longer
regulated in their growth so it's it's
dysregulated growth growth cell growth
out of control and this can happen in
blood cancers or solid tumor cancers you
know any kind of a tissue where the
cells of our body begin to proliferate
no longer in control and that's
basically dysregulated dysregulated cell
growth is the is that is the definition
and now the cells of course will can
grow very rapidly and a mass but what
frightens most people and what is most
difficult to manage is when they spread
from their primary site and be and of
origin to other tissues the metastasis
or metastasis if you will this is the
makes the cancer much more difficult to
control using using conventional
treatments yeah now the war on cancer
was declared I think by Nixon in the
1970s and I know we were always told
we're getting older and that's why we
are but how are we actually going in
this war on cancer well it's not going
very well at all worldwide I was back I
was in China and they they have four
million cases a year I think over ten
thousand people a day dying from cancer
in China in the United States it's over
over 1,600 people a day dying it's
usually linked to the size of your
population so you know it's a it's a
certain percentage of your population
but the the important thing is in the
United States the rate of increase for
cancer deaths is now slightly faster
than the rate of population increase so
and as a percentage of course but so
that means we're not doing very well in
this fact it's an abysmal failure if you
if you ask me and if it's a failure
worldwide it's not just the United
States I think most countries are having
the same the same problems there
is more cancer and more people are dying
from cancer and we have no therapies
that have made any major impact on the
progression of the disease which which
kind of begs the question and I think
it's promo we're going to talk about
this what is the origin of it what
causes cancer well this was the address
this in my book it was the oncogenic
paradox which but which has perplexed
the majority of cancer researchers in
the field
clinicians as well as basic researchers
and that was first to my knowledge was
pointed out by Albert Cink Jorgy who won
the Nobel Prize for his work on vitamin
C but he he was the first person to
define this aquagenic paradox like how
is it possible that you could get cancer
from so many provocative agents such as
radiation carcinogens viruses
inflammation hypoxia rare inherited
mutations age so all of these are risk
factors for the development of cancer
but what was the problem was there there
never appeared to be any common
pathophysiological linkage between any
of these so-called risk factors and the
origin of the disease and then what I
did was simply linked the origin of the
disease every one of those risk factors
does one thing they have one thing in
common and that is they all in one way
or another damage the respiration of our
cells the organelle called the
mitochondria in some way become damaged
as the result of any one of these
so-called provocative asians so the
paradox now has been resolved cancer can
come from any number of different agents
any one of which could be the
precipitory initiation of the disease
for example in a breast tumor if you
have an occluded milk duct that leads to
an insight to inflammation this could
damage the mitochondria of the cells in
that region thus putting them on the
path for dysregulated cell growth
so the initial step in all forms of kin
sir is it is it damage to the
respiratory control system which
regulates the growth of the cell and
consequently the origin of the disease
and this was pointed out many years ago
by Otto Warburg but he didn't have all
the he didn't have all the facts at that
time but he had that he pretty much
understood the origin he just didn't he
wasn't able to link it to all the
different things that we have done since
then I thought when we talk about
respiration might be worth just
reminding our lease notice they may not
be up on biochemistry as well as we are
what our normal cell produces its energy
well Norma we all breathe that's why you
know we breathe air and as a matter of
fact when we sleep we don't stop
breathing are we we have control systems
in our brain and the in the brainstem
that allow us to continue to breathe
even while we're sleeping because the
breathing is necessary we bring in the
oxygen which serves as the common
electron acceptor and that forms water
and we generate urine and we breathe
moisture out of our breath and we also
exhale co2 and the co2 the carbons come
from the foods that we ate that we eat
so the energy that we generate comes
from the foods that we eat together with
the oxygen that we breathe and and
together this is how we get our energy
and you know the waste products are
basically co2 and water in the foods
that we actually are able to to digest
and use other other foods and things are
eliminated and wet as wastes but we
obtain the nutrients and the energy from
from this from from this process and
this is called aerobic respiration which
takes place in the mitochondria of all
of our cells this is how except
erythrocytes block our blood cells don't
contain mitochondria but they but they
they ferment they have no nucleus so
they can't divide but you know they have
a limited half-life they're not
long-lived cells like we have in our
brain or in our heart and other places
but all the cells in our body get the
oxygen in the blood so we breathe in the
air it goes through the lungs there's an
exchange of gases so though co2 comes
out the fresh oxygen goes into the
bloodstream and the bloodstream
themselves in our blood the
with recites deliver the oxygen to our
tissues and there's an exchange of gases
there and and we generate the energy
through this is what we call the normal
respiration we breathe in and we exhale
and the waste products are water and co2
and and in each cell this quite a few
mitochondria yes it could vary depending
on the cell but muscle cells are loaded
heart cells are loaded with mitochondria
because that they're constantly in an
energetic situation brain cells are
normal neurons they are loaded with
mitochondria so some cells have more
mitochondria than others prostate in the
prostate gland is much fewer
mitochondria actually in some of the
cells so but you know by and large with
the exception of erythrocytes primarily
very most of the other cells have
varying numbers of mitochondria and
they're like a spaghetti it's like it's
this kind of a spaghetti organelle it
it's like strands of spaghetti you all
through the cytoplasm so and this is
where we we bring in the glucose into
the cells and the from the food that we
eat eventually gets broken down into
glucose which is a sugar and that goes
right into the cells where it is it's
metabolized through the ancient pathway
of glycolysis to pyruvic acid which then
goes into the mitochondria to generate
the the energy with co2 and water as the
waste and that currency is the ITP the
yes yeah so in a normal arabic
respiration a cell produces a lot of ATP
that's right and and and it depends on
how much ATP the cell actually produces
and it's depending on the electrical
gradient across a particular membrane so
and that gives you the power of the of
the the differential from outside to
inside the ionic gradients like in the
heart it's a minus 86 millivolts which
is quite quite a steep gradient and
that's needed because the heart is a
muscle and it needs to contract and the
energy the
to maintain that gradient comes from ATP
which is generated in the mitochondria
so so the main one of the main source
uses of energy in the cell is membrane
gradients and they'll make up anywhere
from 40 to 70 percent of the expended
energy in a cell is used to make
membrane gradients and if you stop
making ATP there's no longer a gradient
it reaches equilibrium and that's death
the fastest way you take cyanide and it
stops the electron transport chain in
all cells quickly and you die very
quickly so that does emphasizes how
powerful and how necessary respiration
is for our vitae for our for our living
State which segues nicely into what's
the difference between that and the
cancer cell well the cancer cell because
because it sustained this damage to the
respiration and believe me the cells at
first will will try to correct the
damage cancer doesn't usually start
acutely it usually starts chronically so
there's a chronic interruption of energy
through respiration and some cells some
cells can't deal with that like if you
have a brain cell neuron in the brain
and the energy from respiration is
disrupted in any particular way that
cell will die it will never become a
cancer cell heart cells rarely if ever
become tumors muscle doesn't often
become tumors because the cell will die
all these cells that have the capacity
to upregulate and ange the ancient
pathways of fermentation can can form
cancer and most of these are epithelial
cells or glial cells in the brain and
these kinds of cells they they have the
capacity to up regulate these ancient
pathways of fermentation now you have to
realize all living organisms on our
planet started off as four mentors that
is getting energy without oxygen and
and we had no oxygen in the atmosphere
when the earth was first formed for
billions of years we had no no no oxygen
and everything all the living organisms
at that time fermented and those those
ancient pathways are are still in
ourselves but they only perform a a of
the of the metabolites they're not to
key them with evolution my toe khandhas
the fusion of cells that could capture
and use oxygen with cells that could not
and they became these hybrid symbiotic
kinds of cells and those were the origin
of who we are and most and most
respiring species so so this little
organelle was able to capture oxygen and
use it to produce energy and but the
first part of the energy process of
these ancient fermentation pathways that
all the cells on the planet used and
what the cancer cells are simply doing
is falling back on the ability of these
ancient pathways to generate energy so
they lose the capacity to get energy
from from oxygen and then start to get
energy from a fermentation and what they
do is they ferment lactic acid which
comes from glucose and they and they
ferment sucks in Ag acid which comes
largely from glutamine and some other
minor amino acids so they ferment
glucose and glutamine so they're
baguette they fall back on this pathway
and what drives these fermentation
pathways are these so called uncle genes
so when people hear about it's a genetic
no no these oncogenes are facilitators
of fermentation pathways they're not the
cause of cancer they facilitate the
ability of a tumor cell to generate
energy without oxygen and that's the
origin and this is what happens so that
I mean that is a very fundamental point
there isn't it I mean how one sees the
oncogene because this has been the focus
I mean the alternative to this as an
origin is what has been going on for so
long now and that is this focus on the
genetic origin well here's the situation
because you talk about tumor suppressor
genes and oncogenes and you've you've
fallen into the the gene think
trap and we and what we know is that
when the respiratory system is damaged
in any particular cell the mitochondria
form these reactive oxygen species and
these are what we call reactive oxygen
radicals superoxide nitric oxide nitric
radical the nitrogen radical you know
these damaged these damaged DNA and
proteins and lipids and it's no that's
the origin of the mutations that
everybody studies so everybody's looking
for these so-called cancer mutations
they're all coming as downstream epi
phenomena side effects of damage to the
respiration so these mutations are
essentially effects they're not the
cause of the disease and the oncogenes
of course are dysregulated but there
they are the transcription factors they
up regulate these fermentation pathways
so oncogenes are always activated in
these tumor cells so that the tumor cell
can bring in fermentable fuels in to
burn for energy I wouldn't say burn they
don't burn they ferment so they use
these ancient pathways to get the energy
that they need the oncogenes are the
facilitators and the mutations that
people think are important are all
downstream effects they're not the cause
they're the effect they mean they mean
essentially very little yet field is all
focusing on that and how is that where's
that gotten us yeah we're gonna get
we're going to get into that back to the
back to the energy just I ask the
question now are there a lot of
mitochondria in human cells in healthy
cells are there a lot of mitochondria
and cancer cells yes there are now
interestingly enough some very very
aggressive cancers like some breast
cancer it's very hard to find the
mitochondria and there but but they're
there but they're very diminutive and
they're structurally abnormal however
they do produce and we've now recognized
this very recently they do produce
substantial energy but from fermentation
in the mitochondria it's called
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation
it's an ancient pathway
that can generate a large amount of ATP
when oxidative phosphorylation or
respiration is defective well it's in
all the textbooks and if you look at the
krebs cycle which is always a very
complicated thing for students there's a
one little pathway in the Krebs cycle or
the tricarboxylic acid cycle where ATP
is produced without oxidative
respiration in cancer cells that pathway
becomes massively upregulated so you can
generate substantial amount of energy
from mitochondria but it's not coming
through oxidative phosphorylation it's
coming from this ancient fermentation
pathway and this and this is what
distinguish but they use glutamine as
the fuel for that pathway so once we
once we understand now that we know
what's driving the cancer cell where
they're getting their energy from it's
very simple to target the glutamine and
the glucose and take away the energy
that these cells are needing and they
die they can't survive without
fermentation energy and this is the what
Warburg originally thought but he only
focused on the glycolytic pathway using
glucose he never knew about the amino
acid pathway and that's what we know
we've now written about this and we're
studying this and very few people in the
field acknowledge this because they all
think that respiration is normal in
cancer cells because they take in oxygen
and this is absurd because the oxygen
they're takin in is not generating the
ATP the ATP is coming from a different
site in that organelle now the thing
that always fascinates me and I mean I
myself have had prostate cancer so I
know this goes on that the profession
Lee has has readily embraced this idea
that cancer cells use glucose
preferentially to metabolize and so in
PET scans what do they do tell our
listener about PET scans because this
fascinates me that the profession is
willing to accept it diagnostically but
hasn't made the leap into therapeutics
tell us about a PET scan first well you
know yeah well so what you do is you
take a glucose molecule and you put a
marker on it like a Fleur
deoxy glucose you can you can put a
little tracer on it and and when you
inject it into the into the blood of the
patients it will it'll it'll be taken up
more avidly in the cancer cells than in
the surrounding tissue and then it
lights up like a Christmas tree these
metastatic lesions or the tumor itself
and that's as you said because they have
an avid they don't prefer glucose they
have no choice it's not a preference
it's a dependency if they're if the
ability of the cell to generate energy
through respiration is defective then
the in order to make up for that very
highly efficient system and you use an
inefficient system the inefficient
system is then dependent on a far
greater amount of of the material coming
into the south so the large and Glueck
this if you're going to ferment glucose
to get the same amount of ATP as you did
when you respired
when you did respiration you have to
take in a massive amount of glucose
because it's so much and less efficient
than respiration so consequently glucose
transporters on the cancer cells are
highly up regulated so when you give a
label glucose for PET scan it lights up
these cancers and then some people say
well it's not all cancers because you
know we do glucose and there's some very
aggressive cancers that don't light up
on on floor with the oxy glucose I get
me there burn and glutamine put the
glutamine tag on them and you'll see the
difference so they're either taken in
glucose or glutamine or both they can't
survive without these fuels no tumor
cell can survive without glucose and
glutamine so there's so that the
management of the disease becomes
remarkably simplified and you all you do
is take away glucose and glutamine the
pet goes away and the tumor goes away
and and that's what we're seeing Wow I
mean that's that's huge because because
let's just before we go into how how we
approach that and and it is it as simple
as that is it as simple as just removing
glucose and glutamine from a person and
the tumor will die yeah I mean it's it's
it's embarrassingly simple now the the
people say well how can it be because
people have been studying the wrong
thing for decades
it's now I don't want to make it sound
like it's that like you targeting
glucose is extremely easy because you
use ketogenic diets and you once you do
that you can you can actually use
insulin you push glucose out of
existence so those cells that are
heavily dependent on glucose are dropped
dead instantly
it's the glutamine that requires a
little bit more sophistication because
glutamine is part of our immune system
and gut cells and glutamine is needed by
many of our normal cells so when we
target glutamine we do it strategically
we don't do it like a bull in a china
shop I mean you have to know how to
pulse and degrade glutamine slowly and
the tumor when you when you have the
glucose under control there's no glucose
in the system and at all the normal
cells are burning ketones then you
strategically pound out the glutamine a
little bit without harming the rest of
the body it's just that you just have to
use common common sense for crying out
but you know a lot of people don't
understand the biology cancer so
consequently they're doing all these
insane things like radiation and chemo
and all this nonsense because they don't
understand the biology of the problem
and it's actually an embarrassing once
this once what I'm telling you becomes
known people are going to say this has
been a big disaster for so long as harm
so many people well we could have done
this or that we could have solved the
problem and that's and that's where
we're going with this Wow I just have to
pause there for a moment because as you
say Haiti you know the implications of
that are so huge why did the resistance
I mean I mean I know I think I know the
answer this but maybe you could share
that with our listeners why the
resistance well because people have been
locked into a dogmatic view of what they
thought cancer was and dogmatic a
dogmatic view on anything is so powerful
it's a religion mecan't change the
person's religion by telling them that
the other religion is better if a person
spends his entire academic career
thinking that a situation was in one way
and then someone comes along and tells
them it's a different way it's very
difficult to accept and despite the
evidence that could be presented no no
it can't be it's not true if it were
that easy we would have all done with it
what no that's not true at all you've
been locked into a mindset and
Matic view of what that is you go back
and look at the the geocentric and
heliocentric origin of the of the of the
solar system I mean for decades -
everybody thought the earth was the
center of the solar system and
Copernicus who you know was the first to
to identify the problem was vilified and
it took it took quite a minute
two centuries to accept from the
Catholic Church that the earth was not
the center of the unit of the solar
system even despite all that they they
they threw the Galileo in a house
arrested him for crying out loud for
challenging the dogmatic view so we have
a same situation here the dogmatic view
is cancers of genetic disease the
pharmaceutical companies have launched
all these immunotherapies based on the
gene theory if the gene theory is
incorrect and all of this other stuff is
largely nonsense now every now and then
you'll find a person that will respond
really well to one of these oh look it's
working great but they're not talking
about the other 80% of people who didn't
respond so well or who have suffered
immensely as the result of this of this
approach you know you're using radio so
people that literally got a huge revenue
generation for radiation therapy in
these clinics are you kidding me I mean
a lot of these hospitals generate depend
on radiation as a revenue source well
all of a sudden you're gonna say hey you
don't need to radiate anybody we can
kill these tumor cells by targeting
glucose and glutamine these guys look at
dear L like a deer-in-the-headlight they
don't know what to say they've never
been trained they know very little about
the biology of the disease and you come
along and tell them this and what are
they gonna do they're gonna say well it
can't be right because because the G the
genetic theory of it would would demand
that there was a consistency like when
you took it when you looked at at colon
cancer in ten patients you would see
consistency in the in the DNA of the
colon cancer but that's not what they
find is it no it's all different
every cell the tumor is a different
genetic entity so you know one cell may
have a certain group of mutations
another cell may have another group of
mutations no two cells have the same
mutation some cancer cells have no
mutations and everything nobody talks
about that so when you start putting all
the facts together about the gene theory
then it becomes a big
it's like in in comprehend any one would
believe it yet they do and then when you
tell people that it's not this kind of a
thing in their worldview says it was and
they're involved in an NIH research
grants it's not only from the National
Institutes of Health it's it's your
country Germany or they're all they're
all being funded for research on hunting
for various cancer genes and if the
genes are all epiphenomena downstream
effects then we're wasting millions and
millions of dollars on stuff that has no
relevance very little relevance than the
nature of the problem so you have this
worldview that's actually wrong and how
is that worldview been doing in the
battle against cancer this is the reason
why we have very little progress because
people are not studying the correct
thing nor are they adapting these things
for the clinic we are now treating
patients in Turkey and Egypt with the
concept of cancer is a metabolic disease
and the patients are doing really well
quality of life is is good and they're
they're living they're living in a
better state and we can do this
worldwide with no problem it's just that
people have to be retrained there's and
that's another thing there's very few
physicians out there they're locked in
that number one they don't understand
the biology and number two they're
locked into a treatment protocol the
standards of care that seem to be
written in granite that nobody seems to
be able to to change and this is another
tragedy why are they inflexible in
Australia I'm telling you there's a lot
they they're the same they're no
different than the United States they're
no different than Germany England
they're all locked into this mind view
we got overuse the radiation we use
toxic chemicals why are you using
radiation intoxicant well we have to
kill the tumor cells but we can pull
away the glucose including me and do the
same thing without arming the patient
well I can't be right that can't be
right otherwise they don't read the
literature they don't understand the
biology and this is so consequently you
have this continuing disaster worldwide
so let's just talk about this approach
or the I mean obviously the the
understanding of the underlying cause is
critically important I mean can't you
can endure it can't overstate that what
tell us about the approach I mean it is
simple but but what is it I mean we talk
about ketogenic what does explain to our
listener what that means yeah well what
we did we published a paper my physician
friends and research colleagues Don
D'Agostino and and Joel maroon they're a
neurosurgeon from the University of
Pittsburgh and yeah we took to dumb a
few weeks ago it was feminine yes he was
on my paper you know and we put it
together it's called press pulse and and
and basically the first step we do is we
bring the blood Sugar's down as quickly
as possible in these patients so we
either do a water only fast or we do
transition and from ketogenic diet into
therapeutic fasting and the bottom line
is you just got to get the glucose down
and one and when the blood sugar goes
down the inflammation and the micro and
tumor microenvironment goes down and you
actually start to kill cells through
various killing mechanisms AAP ptosis so
what it does is it makes the whole micro
environment less angry less inflamed
which then which then slows down the
tumor so so you're starting to slow it
down and you know you're taking away the
the abnormal blood vessels and this kind
of thing and then so once the patient is
into therapeutic ketosis then we begin
to treat with the that's a prayer we
called therapeutic ketosis is kind of a
press it brings the body into a new
metabolic state where the normal cells
get healthier and the tumor cells get
weaker many of many of them die we use
various other forms of of therapy to
reduce anxiety many cancer patients have
anxiety because they have this view that
they're they have a life-threatening
condition they have anxiety because
they're sometimes mistreated by toxic
chemicals which makes them feel terrible
so anxiety elevates blood sugar and you
need to reduce anxiety so there's
various kinds of yoga massage therapy
music therapy whatever it is is going to
be able to lower your anxiety levels
lower the blood sugar levels and then we
use drugs that will further target
insulin further target glucose like
insulin or to deoxy glucose you got to
be careful you know we its doses timing
and scheduling that we're working on and
then we use hyperbaric oxygen because
it's very interesting if you take away
the fermentable fuel
like glucose and glutamine and and this
the this the reactive oxygen species now
killed a tumor cell glucose and
glutamine put up a protective shield
around the tumor cell and that prevents
them from being killed by these toxic
radiation and chemo but if you remove
the glucose and glutamine and they form
their own reactive oxygen species and
die from internal internal they explode
from into inside rather than being
treated from the outside beautiful it's
a very very elegant non-toxic way to
kill these so just just to remind our
listeners the hyperbaric means more
octane bur where oxygen is increased
yeah you put the patient into a
pressurized oxygen you know a lot of
athletes use this it's it's very
interesting that insurance companies
will cover hyperbaric oxygen therapy for
people that were severely burned from
radiation therapy to treat their cancer
the gut sometimes the gut gets all
damaged from the chemo but the insurance
company so ok do hyperbaric oxygen will
cover hyperbaric oxygen to try to repair
the tissue damage that you sustained
from being treated for Kansas is nuts if
you did the hyperbaric oxygen part of
the treatment they don't cover that it's
actually part of the therapy you can
kill tumor cells with hyperbaric oxygen
as long as the patient is first in
therapeutic ketosis and then you can
target glucose and glutamine
simultaneously while the patient is in
hyperbaric oxygen so dahm dahm showed
some beautiful work on this and and the
patients seem to do really well as well
it's it's a non-toxic way of killing
tumor cells but you got to first put the
patient into therapeutic ketosis and if
you target a little bit of glutamine
while this is going on it's even an
additional attack on the tumor cell so
there's a lot of ways you can do this
it's actually it's not a how many
different unbelievable ways you can kill
cancer cells without harming the patient
what because now you're targeting their
very fundamental weakness this is a
completely different strategy than what
we're using in the clinic presently to
treat most cancer patients so putting
people into third pootie ketosis is the
press what's the pulse the pulse would
be hyperbaric oxygen it would be it
would be drugs that are that are pulsed
that would work
together with the diet they work
synergistically like we're using a
glutamine targeting drug now called on
its six Asian or leucine it's a it's a
drug that that's been known for years
but never been used in a press pulse
console it's unbelievable it's so
powerful and it can kill cancer cells
massively without without with minimal
toxicity when used with ketogenic diets
so these drugs that were formerly quite
toxic and misused and not understood
have a new life which make which makes
them very very therapeutic when used in
the correct approach so we use that as a
pulse hyperbaric oxygen as a pulse
insulin is a pulse and we and we and we
work the pulses off the press and that
we don't what we're trying to do is
degrade the tumor slowly rather than you
know all at once and and then bring as
we degrade the to more slowly we bring
the normal cells into a much greater
state of health so as you're killing off
the cancer in your body you're also
bringing the whole body into a new state
of metabolic homeostasis so on our
patients some of the people that I know
I'm not a physician but my clinic
clinical friends who can do this tell me
it's unbelievable you can get people
that have cancer and type 2 diabetes and
you get rid of both the type 2 diabetes
and the cancer you know and metabolic
imbalances and all this stuff Reid
corrects itself and at the same time
yeah you blast out the tumor cells in a
strategic way not harming the rest of
the body the whole thing is is it's
really elegant they knew how to do this
man it would be a lot of fun and for the
patient as well as the practitioner but
but unfortunately too few people know
anything about this they don't
understand it and therefore it doesn't
go you it's not used and ketogenic what
does that I mean what does that tell our
listening what that actually means in
terms of carbohydrate intake or you know
to put a person into ketosis
what is the carbohydrate intake that one
should be aiming for well we don't know
exactly because everybody's a little bit
different so we that's why we published
the glucose ketone index calculator and
what this does is you take a blood
monitor like a precision extra
blood-glucose ketone monitors like what
people with diabetes would have except
that it also measures ketones as well as
glucose so the same meter it's a little
handheld meter you take a small drop of
blood from the fingertip and then you
would put the drop of blood on on the
glucose stick and then the same get the
value for that and then put the new
ketones strip into the meter and you get
the value for the ketone and then we
convert everything to the same unit
millimolar and you just divide the ratio
of the glucose and the blood by the
millimolar of ketone in the blood and
you come up with the singular number
cause the ratio of glucose to ketone so
most people eaten eating standard
Western diet would have a gki of about
30 to 40 which would be considered a lot
of glucose and very little if any
ketones but if you stop eating
carbohydrates or stop eating completely
what happens is obviously blood sugar
goes down and as blood sugar goes down
insulin goes down and then your body
starts turning towards natural stored
fats and you start making these
water-soluble fat breakdown products
called ketone bodies and they can
replace glucose in the majority of the
cells in our body in other words the
cells in our body evolved to burn either
glucose or ketones and when we don't eat
glucose then becomes unavailable largely
and we start burning fats and our ratio
our ki ji ki starts to go down it's like
a golf score the lower the score the
better the better you do so if you can
get 1.0 or below that means the patient
is in therapeutic ketosis they're
burning more ketones than they are
glucose and then we can use drugs to
push that glucose down even further once
the patient is in ketosis because
they're all of our cells are now recent
we don't we don't need glucose so you
can push glucose way down even the brain
is now burning ketones so you can push
blood sugars way down and that's so
that's how we we know and as I said
cancer patients have anxiety so it's
it's harder to push their gki down that
it is a normal person who just wants to
get into ketosis but you know once
physicians understand this there's going
to be a lot of ways that we can get the
ratio down in these cancer patients
and then so this then enters the state
of therapeutic ketosis and it can vary
from one person to the next so some guy
might be able to eat a little bit more
carbs than another guy but the bottom
line is you got to get that one point
zero or below because that's when the
tumor cells are going to be under
maximal pressure they won't be able to
they won't be able to compete with
normal cells and consequently they'll
die and it's it's not a complicated
thing we've seen it over and over again
not only in patients but in the
preclinical models that we work with but
you know that's one point but and then
the body of course will they say well
our liver can make gluconeogenesis
that's true but but once once we have
the body transition to ketosis we can
get rid of we can we can actually use
insulin and and other drugs to push
those blood sugars down to a very very
low level so the tumors are going to be
starved starved from these things and
the normal cells try to compete directly
against the tumor cells for the
fleetingly small amount of glucose it's
unbelievable and the tumor cells lose
every time because they have all these
mutations that prevent them from
adapting to this new environment so
that's that's the glucose part of it how
do we hand what about the glutamine tell
us glutamine is an amino acid which is
protein so tell us how we how we do with
glutamine
yeah glutamine is the most abundant
amino acid in our body okay in the
bloodstream you look at the you look at
amino acids a lot of the blood is loaded
with amino acids all kinds of fuel don't
forget the bloodstream is our our
conduit to supply remove and supply
energy and remove wastes it's our it's
our ultimate connector through all
through all parts of the body so
glutamine glutamine is the most abundant
and we and we can synthesize it from
glucose so we can actually make
glutamine from glucose that's why it's
considered non-essential amino acid
however it's so essential for so many
functions the urea cycle all of our
immune system cells use tremendous
amounts of glutamine so we have to use
kid gloves when we touch glutamine
because we so many of our normal cells
need the same fuel but the cancer cells
are use are using that fuel to generate
energy ATP where whereas the normal
cells are using it as a as a building
block material not so much for
generating ATP but but doing all the
other things so we have two cells that
need the same fuel for different reasons
one cell is dependent on it for energy
in this cell uses it to do its normal
metabolic functions so when we target
glutamine we have to use drugs there's
no dietary manipulation of glutamine
like we can manipulate glucose through
the diets and things like this so
glutamine has to be done in my mind with
various kinds of drugs and there are a
series of different kinds of drugs that
must be used and it has to be done as I
said timing dosage and scheduling
because you don't want to harm your
immune system if you kill a lot of
cancer cells our immune systems cells
have to come in and pick up the corpses
you have to remove the dead cell bodies
from the area where they were otherwise
you get infections and other kinds of
problems and that's our immune cells and
they need glutamine also so if we're
gonna take away glutamine we kill the
tumor cell but at the same time we can
give glutamine back to stimulate our
normal cells to pick up the corpses it's
it's a it's an unbelievably nice
strategy it's just that you got to know
what you're doing you have to be your
educated and you have to know the
biology of the system and then there's
gonna be all kinds of new ways to do
this I'm just outlining some of the
generalities here mmm what are some of
the drugs that used for glutamine well
that's what I said I said dawn oh yeah
it's the yeah we can as well we have
links to that article I've got on my
desk key the principles from you guys
yeah and there are a number of different
we use chloroquine chloroquine is the is
the anti-malarial drug we use EGCG which
is the active ingredient in green tea
extract they these all target various
aspects of the glutamine pathway so if
you know how to use these drugs
strategically you can degrade the
glutamine ability of the tumor while at
the same time you're shutting that front
door of glucose and therefore the tumor
becomes checkmate it can't survive
there's no other fuel in the
microenvironment that can keep these
cells alive in sufficient quantities yes
they can use some other amino acids yes
they can use a little at this this is
not enough of that stuff around this
it's not there you got to have a
logistic supply of the fuel to keep the
cell alive and if the two main fuels are
restricted they don't live long on
anything else that might be around that
comes something that characterizes
almost all
conventional cancer treatment is side
effects whether it's the side effects of
the chemotherapy the surgery the drugs
what are the side effects of this
approach well you know if you don't do
it right constipation
I guess maybe could be one of the side
effects because I worked in the epilepsy
field for years using ketogenic diets in
preclinical systems and working with my
physician colleagues you know imbalance
you can have certain kinds of maybe a
little hormonal imbalance but not so
much but Newton usually electrolyte
imbalances can happen but this is also
easy to correct I mean just a little bit
of blood work and tell you whether you
you need to tweak this this or that so
it's not terribly this there's no hair
loss you know there might be a little
lightheadedness at the beginning when
you start to transition away from
glucose to ketones because our bodies
are addicted to glucose so we have these
withdrawal symptoms that might be there
a little bit but none of it's compared
to what you know none of it is compared
to rate what you the side effect from
radiation and toxic poisons I mean given
this is tremendously different so you
know what most now it does require some
degree of compliance on the part of the
patient and it does require some
knowledge on the part of the attending
physician to know how to tweak the
system what might become a little
imbalanced like for example a lot of
cancer patients are given vitamin D as a
supplement because they get they get
vitamin D deficiency after chemo or
radiation or something like this but
when you do ketogenic diet metabolic
therapy the fat in our bodies are being
used for energy and vitamin D is stored
in fat so sometimes you can have an
excess of vitamin D during the course of
the treatment so so physicians need to
be aware of this so constant monitoring
of blood work the various electrolytes
and and and markers in the blood are a
key element to how you use metabolic
therapy for killing cancer cells but all
of this is easily measured the knowledge
base on this is so deep so with almost
most
physicians can look at a blood blood
workup and say oh a little too much here
a little too little there and we can
adjust these these will give him a
little bit more you know electrolyte
electrolyte supplements to reduce some
of the potential imbalances that we may
have but but this is very simple
compared to you know the horrific
adverse effects that you get from
standards of care which you know throw
your whole body you blowing out your
microbiome you're creating all kinds of
metabolic issues that we don't we don't
see nearly any of that in metabolic
therapy now tell us this has been that's
fantastic I gotta tell you this is but
but listen if we would give if you were
giving someone advice who's had cancer
who wants to avoid it well what would be
a few tips that you'd give them well
there's two things here one is to avoid
cancer which falls into the realm of
primitive prevention which you know you
know we know what causes cancer as I
said it's the oncogenic paradox any any
provocative agent from the environment
that could damage your respiration would
put you at at potential risk for
developing a neoplasm as group of cells
growing out of control so you can't get
cancer if your mitochondria are healthy
I would say even Warburg said this about
an 80 to 90 percent of all cancers could
be prevented by prevent by by protecting
your mitochondria against oxidative
damage so therapeutic ketosis allows
your mitochondria to be very to be very
healthy and would significantly reduce
cancer risk
so the very fact that putting a person
in therapeutic ketosis would reduce risk
so you know exercise everybody talks
about it diet and lifestyle exercises
but know there's so many people either
their job prevents them from doing this
or they throw caution to the wind or
whatever the hell it is you know people
they're the same everywhere you know
that and besides the high glucose foods
that that these mass-produced
nutritionally the deplete foods they
taste great but they they also create
systemic inflammation putting cells at
risk so therapeutic ketosis would would
eliminate that but at the same
a lot of people like the eat high carb
foods so so it's a balance you know you
know what you need to do a lot of people
don't do it but then once you have that
once you have the disease then it
becomes a different a different thing
okay the strategy that we take to
eliminate the disease now becomes one
where we target and kill tumor cells
while protecting the normal cells so
there's one issue of prevention the
other is the management and I would
imagine that incorporating regular
fasting into your your annual protocol
you know if you went do you go through a
water fast yourself several times a year
is that I know Dom was doing that
occasionally yeah well DOM is like that
I'm not like that you know that I do it
yeah I did it but is it nice no no it's
hard you kidding me
you know you know everybody out easy to
talk about you try not eating for three
days and see how you like it right
you know a friend was feeding his dog he
had to leave the room he was overcome
after three days of water only fast so I
mean this is this is not even studies
it's like oh yeah the first day you can
get through the second day you know and
then of course if you can do it it
becomes a little bit less difficult each
time you do it but Dominic is laying
listen he's he's living then he's living
the style you know I know what is that
he looks like it - yeah he looks mad
most of us don't do that you know it's
it we're hit if we have the problem you
know we know what to do
and and we try to do the best we can but
you know most people want to live in it
but literally since I think once
somebody has been diagnosed with cancer
and faced with an alternative of chemo
radiosurgery often a combination of the
three with all of that entails not only
the anxiety but the assault physically I
mean it's almost a no-brainer isn't it
yeah you know when our friends from
Turkey you know they were forced to use
they used metabolic therapy they did
they did hyperbaric oxygen Kido they did
the whole thing but they still had to
use a little bit of chemo and I because
they would fall out of compliance with
with rules and you know lose licenses
and things like this so I said to them
what happens if we take what do you
think as a professional how these
patients would do if you took away all
the chemo
he said they'd do better I mean why are
you put why you entered to enter
introducing any toxic molecule into your
body when you don't need to so and this
is the the whole thing we think by using
metabolic therapy we can annihilate and
get rid of these tumor cells without
having to subject any toxicity to our
body cuz I guess success rate is it one
interesting question because it's often
quoted as a five-year survival or
two-year survival or even only a few
months survival a drug is considered
successful if it extends life by a few
months what's the success what are we
seeing what are you seeing clinically in
in this ketogenic approach and this
metabolic approach yeah from the papers
that have been published so far listen
we have a lot of patients individuals
who have contacted me who are living far
longer they all that far longer with
stage four cancers they're all out three
four years doing well and people say
well these are anecdotes yeah they can't
be real you know when you have a pile of
anecdotes build up one after another I
mean when is everybody have a fluke and
an anecdote I mean what's going on here
but the Turks my friend in Turkey
Istanbul they have the largest patient
group and we're trying to get these
things published as quickly as we can
but you know they have quite a few they
treat only stage four cancers all
different kinds lung pancreas ovarian
you know all these really bad triple
negative breast sand things like this
and their patients seem to be doing
doing good then everybody survives I
mean it's like anything some people get
so beat up by chemo and radiation that
their bodies can't rally in any way and
they just can't you know they you they
were there they had a window of
opportunity and it was taken away by
some horrific toxic thing and their
bodies can't rally but their average
survival for for Stage four lung cancer
was forty forty four median survival was
forty four months compared to six to
eleven months with all known standards
of care so clearly they're way beyond
that the survival rate is so far and the
quality of life is so much better
so and we're still perfecting this this
is not a this is not a completely
established I mean we're making it
better all the time in fact so many of
these guys once they realize what's
going on they make these suggestions and
we we actually can improve this very
significantly the problem the problem is
is that there's we don't have enough
case reports and then they say well we
need a clinical trial well who's gonna
do the clinical trial right who's gonna
pay for the clinical trial who knows how
to do the clinical trial you're not
gonna get the people who don't know
anything about this running a clinical
trial the trial involves press pulps how
many people out there in the oncology
world understand press pulse how many
people out there who who can who can
apply it to their patients right now
they said there's a lack of skill and
knowledge there's a lack of knowledge
basically this needs to be training they
need to know what they do and then they
then you can take a few patients and do
this so it's it can't be done
double-blind crossover because everybody
knows you're getting drugs diets
hyperbaric oxygen you get all this stuff
and the bottom line is how long can I
keep a patient alive who has stage four
cancer without toxicity and that's the
bottom line you know it's you know and
and we can do that and upend it by my
friends in Turkey and and now in Egypt
we're doing it in Egypt and to do it and
doing it in Hungary the problem is so
many medical schools cancer clinics are
locked into what they do day to day and
then you come along and say hey listen
we don't want to do what you do day to
day they get reactive they don't they
will just can't be the right in and you
have this big you have this big wall of
resistance to doing this and this is the
biggest problem right now we know what
to do we pretty much know how to do it
the problem is who's gonna do it and
that and otherwise you know and then you
have to change the system the system has
to be changed the system right now is
not working so we we should know that
you know don't Tom just taking a step
back from all this because we've covered
you know this is mind-boggling literally
mind-boggling and and fabulous but I
want to take a step back from it just
finally before we finish and and ask you
this question and this is removing
yourself from your position
in this research field as a consumer
we're all consumers of health we're all
on our own health journey what do you
think the biggest challenge is for
people today on their health journey
through life in our modern world yeah
well this is I think I think we move
forward as a species based on the
technological advances that we develop
and every technological advance comes
with you know certain risks so you know
the capture of fire or initially you
know people got burned but they also
move forward and in in in developing all
kinds of new technologies and I think
that sometimes of the food industry has
created many foods that put us at risk
for not only cancer but we a lot of
other diseases but I think if we are
aware I think if we understand we are
aware of things at least we have the the
choice to make it we can make a decision
as to whether we want to go this
direction or that direction but when
people have are not aware and sometimes
they're given misinformation this
creates problems but I think you know we
move forward with technology and some of
this can be extremely good and some of
it can put us at ricks risk for
different different different conditions
I mean we have Alzheimer's disease you
know as a growing problem which again is
a type of chronic disease coming from in
my mind metabolic imbalances in fact my
Alzheimer's patients are hypo metabolic
they have very low glucose in that they
can't get enough this is why their risk
for cancer is reduced that Alzheimer's
patients are reduced risk for cancer
because they can't get enough glucose
into the brain and not some other organs
so so you can't run you can't drive the
cancer beast without glucose so there
they're lower on that but that's it why
why some neurons develop plaques and
tangles others die why Sumner why some
cells become cancers are there other
cells have these other issues so but we
all know that there it's related to
chronic inflammation mostly coming from
our industrialized societies and until
we recognize this I think but at least
that's the recognition I think most
people understand that I
think what they don't understand is
there is a potential non-toxic so
address I don't say a solution but it's
certainly a way to manage this and
significantly reduce the numbers of
people dying Tom thank you so much for
joining me today this has been fabulous
we're going to have links to that
article the press pulse article that's
sitting right here on my desk but we're
going to have links to it so people can
read it as well thank you so much yeah
thank you
amazing and so fundamentally important
what is the origin of cancer is it a
condition the so called is it a genetic
condition the so called somatic mutation
theory as I mentioned a lot of chemo
therapies focus on this or is it a
metabolic problem with the mitochondria
in ourselves which go out of balance and
cause genetic mutations and
proliferations
it's an important point because it gives
us a vital step how cells produce energy
and does that differ from human cells
and cancer cells the answer is it does
we started this conversation a few weeks
ago with Professor Dominick D'Agostino
but today we really focused on the
cancer aspect of it I must admit when I
reflect back on my own diagnosis of
prostate cancer three or four years ago
I think and and I think that if I would
have understood this better I may have
gone through the metabolic therapy that
Thomas described and then retested
myself with another MRI 12 months later
to see whether the cancer had increased
or decreased look I know it's it's of
course very complicated I'd know that
personally because emotions get involved
in decisions are made but I'd like to
put out I'd like to put this idea out
there and it's actually not a new one
it's been around for a long time but
current research is filled in to you
know gaps so it makes so much sense also
and it gives you control and more most
importantly apart from all of that is
that no nasty side effects because you
are targeting cancer cells fasting is
another topic we're going to expand on
in the coming weeks and months
professor Dom Dominic D'Agostino's said
something a few episodes ago which
resonated with me has there ever been a
time in human history when some form of
fasting intentional or otherwise wasn't
part of our human experience contrast
that now with our overabundance of
seemingly cheap food at least in the
Western world stay tuned we'll be
exploring this theme further in the
weeks ahead this is all just too
important to not revisit so until next
time this is dr. Ron Erlich
be well
this podcast provides general
information and discussion about
medicine health and related subjects the
content is not intended and should not
be construed as medical advice or as a
substitute for care by a qualified
medical practitioner if you or any other
person has a medical concern he or she
should consult with an appropriately
qualified medical practitioner guests